Distinguish between the two ways to enable SASL (#1562)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/partials/authentication.adoc

rpk cluster config edit
----

[[enable-sasl-authentication]]
=== Enable SASL authentication

Redpanda provides the following options for enabling SASL authentication:

> * *`enable_sasl`* - The original approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *`enable_sasl`* - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

> * *`enable_sasl`* - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  **`enable_sasl`** - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

> *  *`enable_sasl`* - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  *`enable_sasl`* - A legacy approach (not deprecated) that is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

> *  **`enable_sasl`** - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  *`enable_sasl`* - The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

* *per-listener configuration* - A more flexible approach that allows you to configure different authentication methods on different listeners.

> Use the following criteria to help you select the best option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following criteria to help you select the best authentication option for your needs:
```

[cols="1,1,2",options="header"]
|===

> |Use Case |Use Authentication Method |Explanation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Use Case |Recommended Authentication Method |Reason(s) to Use
```

|===

[IMPORTANT]
====
*Do not mix configuration methods*.

Using both `enable_sasl` and `kafka_enable_authorization` + `authentication_method` together can lead to configuration inconsistencies and initialization failures. Choose one approach and use it consistently.
====

NOTE: You must <<create-superusers, create at least one superuser>> before enabling authentication. Enabling authentication without a superuser can result in being locked out of the cluster.

==== Use `enable_sasl` for global authentication (backwards compatible)

Using the `enable_sasl` option applies SASL authentication to all Kafka API listeners with a single command.

Use this option when:

* All Kafka listeners will use SASL authentication
* You prefer simpler configuration
* You want to avoid a cluster restart

Trade-offs when using `enable_sasl`:

* ✅ Simple: One command enables authentication on all listeners
* ✅ No restart required
* ✅ No `redpanda.yaml` changes required
* ❌ Cannot configure different authentication methods per listener
* ❌ All listeners must use the same authentication method

> To use this option, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the `enable_sasl` option, run:
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set enable_sasl true
----

This command:

> * Enables SASL authentication on ALL Kafka API listeners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enables SASL authentication on _all_ Kafka API listeners
```

* Implicitly enables authorization (`kafka_enable_authorization` is set to `true`)

[WARNING]
====

> When using this method, do NOT additionally set `kafka_enable_authorization: true` or add `authentication_method: sasl` to `redpanda.yaml`. The `enable_sasl` setting handles both automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using this method, do *not* additionally set `kafka_enable_authorization: true` or add `authentication_method: sasl` to `redpanda.yaml`. The `enable_sasl` setting handles both automatically.
```

====

==== Use per-listener authentication (recommended for new clusters)

This option allows you to configure authentication per listener, giving you flexibility to have different authentication methods on different listeners.

> Use this option when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the per-listener authentication option when:
```

* You need different authentication methods on different listeners (for example, SASL for external, none for internal)
* You're setting up a new cluster
* You want explicit control over which listeners have authentication enabled

Trade-offs when using per-listener configuration:

* ✅ Flexible: Configure authentication per listener
* ✅ Explicit: Clear configuration in `redpanda.yaml` for each listener
* ✅ Can mix authentication methods (some listeners with authentication, some without)
* ❌ Requires configuration in `redpanda.yaml` for each listener
* ❌ Requires cluster restart to apply changes

To configure per-listener authentication:

1. Enable authorization explicitly:
+
[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set kafka_enable_authorization true
----

> 2. Configure authentication method for each listener in `redpanda.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Configure the authentication method for each listener in `redpanda.yaml`:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
redpanda:
  kafka_api:
    - address: 0.0.0.0
      port: 9092
      name: internal
      authentication_method: none  # No authentication for internal traffic
    - address: 0.0.0.0
      port: 9093
      name: external
      authentication_method: sasl  # SASL for external traffic
----
+
See <<Authentication for the Kafka API>> for more details.

3. Restart the cluster to apply the configuration changes.

[WARNING]
====

> When using this method, do NOT set `enable_sasl: true`. The per-listener configuration and explicit `kafka_enable_authorization` handle authentication and authorization separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using this method, do _not_ set `enable_sasl: true`. The per-listener configuration and explicit `kafka_enable_authorization` handle authentication and authorization separately.
```

rpk cluster config edit
----

[[enable-sasl-authentication]]
=== Enable SASL authentication

Redpanda provides the following options for enabling SASL authentication:

> * *`enable_sasl`*: The "original" approach, which is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *`enable_sasl`*: A legacy (not deprecated) approach that is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

> * *Per-listener configuration*: Listener settings in each broker's `redpanda.yaml`. A more flexible approach that lets you configure different authentication methods on different listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *`enable_sasl`*: A cluster-configuration property (set with `rpk cluster config set enable_sasl true`). A legacy (not deprecated) approach maintained for backwards compatibility.
* *Per-listener configuration*: Listener settings in each broker's `redpanda.yaml`. A more flexible approach that lets you configure different authentication methods on different listeners.
```

=== Enable SASL authentication

> Redpanda provides two methods for enabling SASL authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redpanda provides the following options for enabling SASL authentication:
```

Reviewer: I try to avoid saying how many options there are because if it changes, then I have to remember to change the number too (over the years, I've seen this come up many times).

> *Why two methods?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * *Method 1* (`enable_sasl`) is the original approach, maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *`enable_sasl`* - was a common approach when first implemented, and it is maintained for backwards compatibility. It applies SASL globally to all Kafka listeners with a single command.
```

Reviewer: @vuldin 
I'm not sure "the original approach" will resonate so much with users. Original from when? Is there any other distinguishing quality other than it is an "original approach"? Legacy approach?

Author: The problem with legacy approach seems to be that it isn't actually deprecated. I guess "legacy" doesn't actually mean "deprecated" though. Maybe instead of "original" but "first implemented approach"?

Reviewer: mulling it over--i'll come up with something.

> * *Method 2* (per-listener configuration) is the newer, more flexible approach that allows you to configure different authentication methods on different listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *per-listener configuration* - A more flexible approach that allows you to configure different authentication methods on different listeners.
```

> *Which method should I use?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following criteria to help you select the best option:
```

* **For new clusters:** Use *Method 2* (per-listener configuration). This gives you the flexibility to configure authentication per listener, which is useful for mixed environments where some listeners are internal (no auth required) and others are external (auth required).
* **For existing clusters using `enable_sasl`:** Continue using *Method 1* if it meets your needs. Only migrate to Method 2 if you need per-listener authentication control.

> * **For uniform authentication:** If you know all your Kafka listeners will use SASL authentication, *Method 1* is simpler and doesn't require a restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[cols="1,1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Use Case |Use Authentication Method |Explanation

|When creating new clusters
|Use per-listener configuration
|Provides you the flexibility to configure authentication per listener, which is useful for mixed environments where some listeners are internal (no authentication required) and others are external (authentication required).

|When you have existing clusters already using `enable_sasl` 
|Use `enable_sasl`
|You can use per-listener configuration if it continues to meet your needs. You only need to migrate to `enable_sasl` if you need per-listener authentication control.

|When you require uniform authentication
|Use `enable_sasl`
|If you know all your Kafka listeners will use SASL authentication, this option is simpler and doesn't require a restart.
|===
```

[IMPORTANT]
====

> *Do not mix configuration methods*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Do not mix configuration methods*.
```

Using both `enable_sasl` and `kafka_enable_authorization` + `authentication_method` together can lead to configuration inconsistencies and initialization failures. Choose one approach and use it consistently.
====

NOTE: You must <<create-superusers, create at least one superuser>> before enabling authentication. Enabling authentication without a superuser can result in being locked out of the cluster.

> ==== Method 1: Global authentication (backwards compatible)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Use `enable_sasl` for Global authentication (backwards compatible)
```

> This method applies SASL authentication to all Kafka API listeners with a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `enable_sasl` option applies SASL authentication to all Kafka API listeners with a single command.
```

> *When to use:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this option when:
```

* All Kafka listeners will use SASL authentication
* You prefer simpler configuration
* You want to avoid a cluster restart

> *Tradeoffs:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trade-offs when using this `enable_sasl`:
```

* ✅ Simple: One command enables authentication on all listeners
* ✅ No restart required

> * ✅ No `redpanda.yaml` changes needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ✅ No `redpanda.yaml` changes required
```

* ❌ Cannot configure different authentication methods per listener
* ❌ All listeners must use the same authentication method

> *Command:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this option, run:
```

[source,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set enable_sasl true
----

This command:

* Enables SASL authentication on ALL Kafka API listeners
* Implicitly enables authorization (`kafka_enable_authorization` is set to `true`)

[WARNING]
====
When using this method, do NOT additionally set `kafka_enable_authorization: true` or add `authentication_method: sasl` to `redpanda.yaml`. The `enable_sasl` setting handles both automatically.
====

> ==== Method 2: Per-listener authentication (recommended for new clusters)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Use per-listener authentication (recommended for new clusters)
```

> This method allows you to configure authentication per listener, giving you flexibility to have different authentication methods on different listeners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option allows you to configure authentication per listener, giving you flexibility to have different authentication methods on different listeners.
```

> *When to use:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this option when:
```

* You need different authentication methods on different listeners (for example, SASL for external, none for internal)
* You're setting up a new cluster
* You want explicit control over which listeners have authentication enabled

> *Tradeoffs:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trade-offs when using per listener configuration:
```

* ✅ Flexible: Configure authentication per listener
* ✅ Explicit: Clear configuration in `redpanda.yaml` for each listener

> * ✅ Can mix authentication methods (some listeners with auth, some without)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ✅ Can mix authentication methods (some listeners with authentication, some without)
```

* ❌ Requires configuration in `redpanda.yaml` for each listener
* ❌ Requires cluster restart to apply changes

> *Steps:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure per listener authentication:
```
